#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin D:/docs/genetics/alaska-2017/walrus/ms/
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language british
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement class
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine biblatex-natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblatex_bibstyle authoryear
\biblatex_citestyle authoryear
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style british
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes true
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content true
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\author 193499690 "mvb"
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Section*
Discussion
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We developed an ICKMR study design,
 with walrus as a case study,
 as an example for other researchers embarking on this evolving type of study.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We investigated whether using CKMR could improve expected precision in estimates of adult female walrus population size.
 To do this,
 we developed a CKMR model with individual recaptures as a kin type,
 in addition to 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743156
parent
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743162
mother
\change_unchanged
-offspring and half-sibling pairs.
 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743175
In our model development process,
 w
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743177
W
\change_unchanged
e made simplifying assumptions 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743184
for tractability
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743188
to make the model tractable
\change_unchanged
.
 For example,
 we 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743232
decided to exclude paternal kinships and not to model males at all,
 since there would be minimal useful information in the data and extra complications in the modelling;
 and we 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743233
developed 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743235
opted for 
\change_unchanged
a stage-structured (rather than age-structured) model
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743245
.
 The stage-structuring implies that 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743289
,
 assuming unselective 
\change_unchanged
sampling 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743730
by age within stage (which may not be particularly accurate for juveniles).
 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743684
is unselective with respect to age classes within each stage.
 In addition,
 we assumed 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743743
We further assumed 
\change_unchanged
quasi-equilibrium population dynamics
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743757
 across the entire period 2000–2028,
 with 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743696
.
 This included 
\change_unchanged
a constant rate of population change
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743704
,

\change_unchanged
 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743702
demographic rates
\change_unchanged
 and
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743711
 stable
\change_unchanged
 age composition
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743762
.

\change_deleted 193499690 1747743765
 from 2000-2028,

\change_unchanged
 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743799
This is certainly a 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743800
which are 
\change_unchanged
simplification
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743802
s
\change_unchanged
 during at least part of the time frame (Taylor et al.
 2018).
 Nevertheless,
 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743816
with the large sample sizes in this study,
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743816

\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747743827
I don't think sample size is relevant,
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\change_unchanged
 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743888
given that our general purpose was to investigate sample size requirements
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743895
and the need for general targets for design purposes
\change_unchanged
,
 we believe our simplifications were reasonable.

\change_inserted 193499690 1747743325
 That said,
 the initial 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743325
 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743957
appeal of a stage-structured formulaton—
 that it simplifies population dynamics without complicating the close-kin probabilities—
 turned out to be undermined by the addition of IMR data,
 for which pairwise 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

kinship
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 probabilities would be much simpler with a fully age-structured model.
 When the real data arrive,
 it may well be worth revising the model to accommodate full age structure and changing age composition over time.
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The walrus project was initially planned as an IMR project with five years of total survey effort between 2013 and 2017 and another five years planned between 2023 and 2027.
 We found that expected CVs on adult female abundance were 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743428
substantially and 
\change_unchanged
consistently
\change_deleted 193499690 1747743425
 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743429
 
\change_unchanged
lower when using ICKMR than when using IMR.
 Our results indicated that by adding CKMR,
 sufficient precision (defined as a CV of 0.2) in estimates of adult female population size (with planned sample sizes per year of 1600) could be achieved with 1.75 years of total future survey effort (i.e.
 2800 new samples)
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743495

\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747743498
as opposed to..?
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\change_unchanged
.
 Since this expected CV applies to adult females only,
 decision makers may wish to set a lower target CV;
 for example,
 with a target CV of 0.1,
 four additional years of future survey effort would be required
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743456

\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747743474
With IMR or with ICKMR?
 We want a dramatic and clear difference here!
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\change_unchanged
.
 Estimates of adult female and juvenile female survival,
 and of the proportion of adult females in breeding state 2 (calving),
 were also improved with the addition of CKMR.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lethal samples can be incorporated into both IMR and CKMR analyses.
 In this study,
 we considered lethal samples as a potential replacement for some live samples.
 Partial substitution of lethal samples for non-lethal (biopsy) samples resulted in similar precision on abundance estimates.
 In previous years,
 50 samples per year were collected from harvested animals by the US Fish and Wildlife Service Walrus Harvest Monitoring and Reporting Program (WHMP).
 However,
 the total harvest in Alaska is estimated to number ~4,210 walruses per year (mean for 2016-2020;
 USFWS,
 2023).
 Approximately 400 harvested samples would be needed to reduce each cruise by one week or 1600 samples would be needed to remove the need for an entire cruise
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743535
.
 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747743558
I don't think 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

however
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is needed here,
 and it gets massively overused in papers!
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\change_deleted 193499690 1747743526
;
 however,
 w
\change_inserted 193499690 1747743526
W
\change_unchanged
e did not investigate the impact of using exclusively harvested samples in
\change_inserted 193499690 1747744000
 place of 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747744001
 one or multiple 
\change_unchanged
survey
\change_inserted 193499690 1747744005
(s)
\change_deleted 193499690 1747744007
 years
\change_unchanged
.
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747744012
Lethal samples might be just as good in the short term (and in general I am pro using lethal stuff),
 but in the long term 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

it depends
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 You are losing the possibility of future information about survival from either self or offspring recaptures.
 Worth noting...
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Using samples from harvested walruses in combination with non-lethal samples collected from wild animals during research cruises can improve cost efficiency by reducing the need for extended at-sea operations,
 thereby lowering logistical expenses associated with vessel charters and personnel time.
 Additionally,
 partial reliance on harvested samples mitigates disturbance to live walruses by decreasing the need for direct interactions with animals in the wild.
 This approach also strengthens collaboration with Alaska Native hunters and co-management partners,
 fostering cooperative research efforts that align with subsistence practices and local ecological knowledge.
 Such partnerships are essential for long-term monitoring and effective management of the species.
 Furthermore,
 the ongoing contribution of the WHMP to walrus abundance estimation provides a strong justification for maintaining the program,
 ensuring that robust population assessments continue to inform conservation and management decisions.
\change_inserted 193499690 1747744083

\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection

\change_inserted 193499690 1747744105
Age data and epigenetics
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 193499690 1747745153
The results presented here all assume that age is accurately measured for each sample,
 using a methylation-based 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

epigenetic clock
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 .
 Although epigenetic age has been shown to work fairly well in a variety of species,
 including walrus as in 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citealp
key "Robeck2023DNAgepinni"
literal "false"

\end_inset

,
 and further calibration studies are ongoing to improve cost and precision,
 it is not perfectly precise.
 Indeed,
 it would be far from surprising to find a CV of,
 say,
 10% for walrus.
 What impact will this have on ICKMR precision for walrus?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 193499690 1747747184
Failure to allow for any ageing error in CKMR will certainly lead to bias;
 for example,
 the birth-gap between XHSPs will be systematically overestimated,
 so that mortality rates will be underestimated
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747747201
I'm just going to leave it at that,
 and see whether any reviewer is begging for more detail...
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 However,
 as long as the error variance of estimated age is known,
 it is possible to allow for ageing error within the CKMR probability formulas,
 using weighted sums over kinship probabilities at different true ages.
 This should eliminate bias,
 and 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "thomson2020shs-final-rev"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 followed this approach for school shark,
 using (substantially inaccurate) vertebral ages rather than epigenetic clocks.
 Nevertheless,
 in severe cases uncertainty about age can drastically limit the ability to gain information from CKMR,
 even when the number of kin-pairs found is high and the model is adjusted properly,
 as noted from practical experience by 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "trenkel2022thornbaCKMR"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 193499690 1747747105
We have in fact implemented all the necessary code for walrus,
 and we expect to use it when the real data arrive (and when ongoing calibration studies are ready),
 but we opted not to include ageing error in our design calculations (i.e.,
 to assume there is no error).
 We do yet know how big the errors will be,
 but based on recent studies such as 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "Weber2024DNAgeray"
literal "false"

\end_inset

,
 we do not expect them to be as bad as in the two papers previously cited;
 since we already have the code,
 design calculations can be re-run easily enough when better estimates of ageing error are available.
 For that purpose,
 it would also be preferable to move to a fully-age-structured model,
 rather than stage-structured.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 193499690 1747747003
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747747148
I could say more here,
 eg it matters more for younger samples and less when sampling is non-lethal,
 but partly it would be speculation and things I've only recently thought of,
 and it would take up a lot of words...
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 193499690 1747745869
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747745208
Yet another PhD-reviewy-type-paper is Newediuk et al 2025.
 There's a lot of these...
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Simplifying assumptions – DNA age
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Remind reader why age is so important
\change_inserted 193499690 1747744080

\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Answer question reader might be asking:
 what happens if we don’t have age or if our age information is very imprecise?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How would an epigenetic age estimate with low precision impact analysis?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How would an epigenetic age estimate with high precision impact analysis?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At what point can we just use epigenetic age point estimates and ignore uncertainty?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Does existing CKMR literature do this already?
 I think the answer is yes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Our ICKMR model relies on accurate age estimates for sampled animals.
 We did not include age uncertainty in the current model,
 but it could be added.
 Need some info here about DNAge and how we expect it to affect precision.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Note that expected CVs are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

optimistic
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in that they assume that age is known perfectly
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
CKMR is a major advance in population ecology,
 and this paper provides a significant step towards fully leveraging this new method.
 We are the first to demonstrate how CKMR can be combined with IMR into a unified model.
\change_inserted 193499690 1747745667

\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 193499690 1747745702
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Well actually...
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 I'm sure I've mentioned this before,
 but there's an old IWC paper that suggests basically this same thing,
 tho restricted to POPs +IMR.
 Citation here,
 and paper attached (I haven't re-reead it recently).
 So we should not be too firsty about this MS...
 Not sure how best to handle.
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 193499690 1747745676
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "bravington2014abw-ckmr"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_deleted 193499690 1747744586
 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747744244
We demonstrate 
\change_deleted 193499690 1747744049
Our method improves 
\change_inserted 193499690 1747744244
substantially improved 
\change_unchanged
precision in estimates of population size and demographic parameters compared to IMR alone.
 We provide an example of ICKMR study design,
 including model development,
 model checking,
 and design calculations,
 and show how simulated data can be used to evaluate different proposed survey designs.
 While we used walrus as a motivating example,
 we intend our work to provide a roadmap to other researchers considering ICKMR as a tool to estimate population parameters across a range of taxa.
 [847 words]
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
