#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin D:/r2.0/eirenwal/docus/
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
InStar
enumitem
graphicboxes
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures false
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement h
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine biblatex-natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_options maxbibnames=9, maxcitenames=2,terseinits=true,giveninits=true,uniquename=false, uniquelist=false
\biblatex_bibstyle authoryear
\biblatex_citestyle authoryear
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date true
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\notefontcolor #cf8a00
\boxbgcolor #bebebe
\branch not-used
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color background background
\end_branch
\branch child-variance
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color background background
\end_branch
\branch greyout
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color background background
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1.5cm
\topmargin 3cm
\rightmargin 1.5cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\secnumdepth 5
\tocdepth 5
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes true
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
MVB Notes 3/12/2024
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I 
\emph on
think
\emph default
 I've now provided code that could be adapted (not by me,
 I'm kina hoping,
 unless unavoidable!) to produce all the Design results we might want.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The first script is now 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\family typewriter
fit_walrus_ckmR_3_12.R
\family default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 I've kept the old ones.
 The new one is little changed,
 but it gets the file suffixes directly from whatever is in the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\family typewriter
simulation
\family default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 folder.
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
The first such file,
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\family typewriter
WalrusSamples_D1_L1_S3_Sd20241023.RData
\family default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 only contains samples 2013–2017 (can't remember the first year actually,
 but last one is 2017).
 So that one is not so useful for Design testing!
 (All the scenarios in the XLSX file Sampling sheet,
 have samples in at least 2023.) Not sure if it's intentional.
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
There's a now a single function 
\family typewriter
doades()
\family default
 to pull together all Design calculations for any combination of:
 (a) pop-dyn scenario,
 (b) sampling scheme,
 (c) things-of-interest.
 The script "
\family typewriter
design
\family default
_
\family typewriter
eg.r
\family default
" has one example of calling it.
 Highly worth looking at the code in 
\family typewriter
doades
\family default
!
 (It should not look 
\emph on
completely
\emph default
 unfamiliar...)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

quantities-of- interest
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 reported by 
\family typewriter
interesting_stuff()
\family default
 are perhaps not very interesting...
 they will need changing (based on discussions).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
There's one function 
\family typewriter
truncsurv()
\family default
 to calculate the effective survival of adults (given the "CK model" adults don't have a maximum age,
 but the "real/simulated" walruses do).
 And a similar one 
\family typewriter
effective_juve_surv()
\family default
 for juves.
 These should be run for each pop-dyn scenario to generate the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

true
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 parameter values for the Design calculations,
 and theri values should go into the 
\family typewriter
ptru
\family default
 parameter used in those calcs.
 I have 
\emph on
not
\emph default
 done for juves in the master script,
 but it should be done;
 the values presumably should come out of the XLSX file for whatever pop-dyn scenario is currently being looked at.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Each new pop-dyn scenario (increase/decrease etc) needs a new run of all the 
\family typewriter
get_Hbits()
\family default
 stuff.
 Note that the call to 
\family typewriter
add_data()
\family default
 now sets 
\family typewriter
SYEARS
\family default
 explicitly (even if there are zero samples in some years) which keeps the dimensions consistent.
\end_layout

\begin_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
There's no need to re-run 
\family typewriter
get_Hbits()
\family default
 unless the pop-dyn scenario changes—
 specifically,
 not just for a change in the sampling scheme.
 
\family typewriter
doades()
\family default
 is fine for the latter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
It's important to make sure that each 
\family typewriter
lglk
\family default
 (after 
\family typewriter
add_data
\family default
) stays paired with the right 
\family typewriter
ptru
\family default
 and the right 
\family typewriter
Hbits
\family default
!
 Ideally,
 the name of the 
\family typewriter
lglk_
\family default
 would reflect the scenario,
 perhaps...
 and 
\family typewriter
ptru
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
Hbits
\family default
 could even be stashed in 
\family typewriter
environment(this_particular_lglk)
\family default
 for safekeeping.
 There are many ways to go about such things,
 it's quite individual.
 In the past I have written elaborate code to organize results (once written,
 it makes it really simple to churn out results into tables) but I'm 
\series bold
not
\series default
 planning to do so here,
 since otherwise only I will be able to understand it and maintain it...
\end_layout

\end_deeper
\begin_layout Enumerate
I haven't re-checked the checking script 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\family typewriter
compare2sims.r
\family default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 but AFAIK I didn't change anything relevant—
 all today's tweaks were WRTO Design calcs.
 That said,
 I haven't compared to new simulations (but the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

true
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 juve surv would probably need attention first,
 as above).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
For the 4th simulation (D2 L2 S3) the RoI,
 as reported in the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\family typewriter
Nfad_RoI
\family default
...
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 file,
 is actually about -0.03.
 That's quite a bit lower than the -0.02 in the XLSX.?
 -0.03 certainly leads to a big overall decline,
 the 2027 numbers being about <50% of the 2000 numbers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
I've added a paper outline,
 but as yet I have 
\emph on
not
\emph default
 created child documents for the sections (to allow independent writing).
 We should prolly all agree on the structure first!
 There is also a version exported to DOCX,
 using my 
\family typewriter
lyxport
\family default
 R package that I emailed you separately about.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
